---
title: What are environment variables in React and how to use them?

date: 2023-04-20 09:00:00 +0200
categories: [JavaScript, React]
tags: [javascript, react] # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

Recently I developed a 'Recipe Application' that needed an API key for users to access the backend. To secure the API key, I decided to store it in a '.env' file. However, when I attempted to implement it, I encountered errors. It took me a couple of hours until I realized the reason for the errors was that I had built the application using Vite, not Create React App. So I decided to document this article to help someone in the same situation as I was.
Environment variables are variables that are used to configure your application in different environments, such as development, testing, and production. These variables are used to store sensitive data such as endpoint URLs, passwords, and API keys that should not be exposed in your code. It allows you to create environment variables and access them within your code rather than include them directly.
Handling environment variables in React is incredibly important. First of all, we need to create a new file called '.env' at the root of the project directory. You can define your custom variables in a key variable format in this file. If you are using Vite, you need to prefix all of the env variables that you want to be accessed by the client with 'VITE\_':

```
VITE_API_KEY = ae9518266f9b49
```

And you can access the variable in our React components using the 'process.env' object:

```javascript
const apiKey = import.meta.env.VITE_API_KEY;
```

Now, if you are in React App, you can simply exchange the 'VITE\_' inside '.env' with 'REACT_APP\_' :

```javascript
REACT_APP_API_KEY = ae9518266f9b49;
```

and inside your code, access it by:

```
const apiKey = process.env.REACT_APP_API_KEY
```

Using environment variables is an important best practice for web developers, and it can help ensure that our applications are secure and easy to maintain.
The last thing you need to do is to add the '.env' file to 'gitignore' which prevents the '.env' file from being tracked and included in Git commits.
